---
layout: ../layouts/Layout.astro
---

import { Label } from "../components/Label.jsx";

# Research

I lead the [Usable Security and Privacy Lab](https://internet.byu.edu), where
our goal is to help people protect their security and privacy online. Our
research is human-centered, meaning we collaborate with people to understand and
design for their needs.

## Current Projects

We have a variety of projects underway.

- Studying how people apply mental models and threat models to understand and
  reason about new authentication technologies.

- Comparing the usability and adoption of Passkeys authentication with security
  tokens and passwords.

- Identifying how usable security and privacy researchers conduct human-centric
  threat modeling.

- Understanding how immigrant generations teach each other online security and
  privacy practices.

## Recent Projects

<Label>Why do people use secure email?</Label>

_Led by Warda Usman_

Secure email systems that use end-to-end encryption are the best method we have
for ensuring user privacy and security in email communication. Despite its clear
advantages, the adoption of secure email remains low, with previous studies
suggesting mainly that secure email is too complex or inconvenient to use.
However, the perspectives of those who have, in fact, chosen to use an encrypted
email system are largely overlooked.

To understand these perspectives, we conducted a semi-structured interview study
that aims to provide a comprehensive understanding of the mindsets underlying
adoption and use of secure email services. Our participants come from a variety
of countries and vary in the amount of time they have been using secure email,
how often they use it, and whether they use it as their primary account.

Our results uncover that a defining reason for adopting a secure email system is
to avoid surveillance from big tech companies. However, regardless of the
complexity and accuracy of a person's mental model, our participants rarely send
and receive encrypted emails, thus not making full use of the privacy they could
obtain. These findings indicate that secure email systems could potentially find
greater adoption by appealing to their privacy advantages, but privacy gains
will be limited until a critical mass are able to join these systems and easily
send encrypted emails to each other. For details, read our SOUPS 2023 paper,
[Distrust of big tech and a desire for privacy: Understanding the motivations of people who have voluntarily adopted secure email](https://www.usenix.org/conference/soups2023/presentation/usman)

<Label>Cryptographic authentication for the web</Label>

_Led by James Conners_

Passwords have numerous drawbacks, and as a result many systems have been
designed to replace them. Password replacements have generally failed to
dislodge passwords due to the complexity of balancing usability, deployability,
and security. However, despite this lack of success, recent advances with
password managers and FIDO2 afford new opportunities to explore system design
for password replacements.

In this work, we explore the feasibility of a system for user authentication
based on certificates. Rather than developing new cryptography, we develop a new
_system_, called Let's Authenticate, which combines elements of password
managers, FIDO2, and certificates. Our design incorporates feedback from a
survey of 397 participants to understand their preferences for system features.
Let's Authenticate issues privacy-preserving certificates to users,
automatically manages their credentials, and eliminates trust in third parties.

We provide a detailed security and privacy analysis, an overhead analysis, and a
systematic comparison of the system to a variety of alternatives using a
well-known framework. We discuss how Let's Authenticate compares to other
systems, lessons learned from our design, and issues related to centralized
management of authentication data. For details, read our 2022 NDSS paper,
[Letâ€™s Authenticate: Automated Certificates for User Authentication](https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/auto-draft-251/).

This work was a forerunner of the
[FIDO Alliance PassKeys](https://fidoalliance.org/passkeys/) system. Both
systems use cryptographic credentials that are stored in the cloud, provide
privacy to users, and ensure easy account recovery.

<Label>Fake key attacks in secure messaging</Label>

_Led by Tarun Yadav_

Popular instant messaging applications such as WhatsApp and Signal provide
end-to-end encryption for billions of users. These applications often rely on a
centralized, application-specific server to distribute public keys and relay
encrypted messages between the users. As a result, they prevent passive attacks
but are vulnerable to some active attacks. A malicious or hacked server can
distribute fake keys to users to perform man-in-the-middle or impersonation
attacks. While typical secure messaging applications provide a manual method for
users to detect these attacks, this burdens users, and studies show it is
ineffective in practice.

This paper presents KTACA, a completely automated approach for key verification
that is oblivious to users and easy to deploy. We motivate KTACA by designing
two approaches to automatic key verification. One approach uses client auditing
(KTCA) and the second uses anonymous key monitoring (AKM). Both have relatively
inferior security properties, leading to KTACA, which combines these approaches
to provide the best of both worlds.

We provide a security analysis of each defense, identifying which attacks they
can automatically detect. We implement the active attacks to demonstrate they
are possible, and we also create a prototype implementation of all the defenses
to measure their performance and confirm their feasibility. Finally, we discuss
the strengths and weaknesses of each defense, the load they impose on clients
and service providers, and their deployment considerations.

For details, see our 2022 CCS paper,
[Automatic Detection of Fake Key Attacks in Secure Messaging](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3548606.3560588),
which was a collaboration among researchers at Brigham Young University, Max
Planck Institute for Informatics, and University of Connecticut.
